## Judgemental Forecasts

Forecasting using judgement is common in practice. In many cases, judgmental forecasting is the only option, such as when there is a complete lack of
historical data, or when a new product is being launched, or when a new competitor enters the market, or during completely new and unique market
conditions.

There are situations where there are no historical precedents, data are incomplete, or only become avaiable after some delay. For example, central
banks include judgement when forecasting the current level of economic activity, a procedure known as nowcasting, as GDP is only available on a
quarterly basis. Research in this area has shown that the accuracy of judgmental forecasting improves when the forecaster has (i) important domain
knowledge, and (ii) more timely, up-to-date information.

It is important to recorgnize that judgmental forecasting is subjective and comes with limitations. However, implementing systematic and well-structured
approaches can confine these limitations and markedly improve forecast accuracy.

There are general setting in which judgmental forecasting is used: (i) there are no available data, so that statistical methods are not applicable and
judgmental forecasting is the only feasible approach; (ii) data are available, statistical forecasts are generated, and these are then adjusted using
judgement; and (iii) data are available and statistical and judgmental forecasts are generated independently and then combined. We should clarify that
when data are available, applying statistical methods is preferable and should always be used as a starting point. Statistical forecasts are generally
superior to generating forecasts using only judgement.

## Beware of limitations
Judgmental forecasts are subjective, and therefore do not come free of bias or limitations.

Judgmental forecasts can be inconsistent. Unlike statistical forecasts, which can be generated by the same mathematical formulas everytime, judgmental
forecasts depend heavily on human cognition, and are vulnerable to its limitations. Judgement can be clouded by personal or political agendas, where
targets and forecasts are not segregated. Even in cases where targets and forecasts are well segregated, judgement may be plagued by optimism or wishful
thinking. For example, it would be highly unlikely that a team working towards launching a new product would forecast its failure. As we will discuss
later, this optimism can be accentuated in a group meeting setting. "Beware of the enthusiasm of your marketing and sales colleagues."

Another undesirable property which is commonly seen in judgmental forecasting is the effect of anchoring. In this case, the subsequent forecasts tend
to converge or be close to an initial familiar reference point. Anchoring may lead to conservatism and undervaluing new and more current information,
and thereby create a systematic bias.

## Key principles
Using a systematic and well structured approach in judgmental forecasting helps to reduce the adverse effects of the limitations of judgmental forecasting,
some of which we listed in the previous section.
#### Set the forecasting task clearly and concisely
It is important that everyone be clear about what the task is. All definitions should be clear and comprehensive, avoiding ambiguous and vague expressions.
In the Delphi method that follows, it may sometimes be useful to conduct a preliminary round of information gathering before seeting the forecasting
task.
#### Implement a systematic approach
Forecast accuracy and consistency can be improved by using a systematic approach to judgmental forecasting involving checklists of categories of
information which are relevant to the forecasting task. For example, it is helpful to identify what information is important and how this information
is to be weighted. It is worthwhile to devote significant effore and resources to put together decision rules that will lead to the best possible
systematic approach.
#### Document and justify
Formalising and documenting the decision rules and assumptions implemented in the systematic approach can promote consistency, as the same rules can be
implemented repeatedly.
#### Segregate forecasters and users
Forecast accuracy may be impeded if the forecasting task is carried out by users of the forecasts, such as those responsible for implementing plans of
action about which the forecast is concerned. Forecasters and users should be clearly segregated. Explaining and clarrifying the process and justifying
the basic assumptions that led to the forecasts will provide some assurance to users.

In contrast, if forecasts are used as targets, they may be set low so that they can be exceeded more easily. Again, setting targets is different from
producing forecasts, and the two should not be confused.
#### The Delphi method
The Delphi method was invented by Olaf Helmer and Norman Dalkey of the Rand Corporation in the 1950s for the purpose of addressing a specific military
problem. The method relies on the key assumption that forecasts from a group are generally more accurate than those from individuals. The aim of the
Delphi method is to construct consensus forecasts from a group of experts in a structured iterative manner. A facilitator is appointed in order to
implement and manage the process. The Delphi method generally involves the following stages:
1. A panel of experts is assembled.
2. Forecasting tasks/challenges are set and distributed to the experts.
3. Experts return initial forecasts and justificatons. These are compiled and summarized in order to provide feedback.
4. Feedback is provided to the experts, who now review their forecasts in light of the feedback. This step may be iterated until a satisfactory level of
consensus is reached.
5. The final forecasts are constructed by aggregating the experts' forecasts.
#### Experts and anonymity
The first challenge of the facilitator is to identify a gorup of experts who can contribute to the forecasting task. The usual suggestion is somewhere
between 5 and 20 experts with diverse expertise. Experts submit forecast and also provide detailed qualitative justifications for these.

A key feature of the Delphi method is that the participating experts remain anonymous at all times. This means that the experts cannot be influenced by
political and social pressures in their forecasts. Furthermore, all experts are given an equal say and all are held accountable for their forecasts. There
have been suggestions that even something as simple as the seating arrangements in a group setting can influence the group dynamics. There is also ample
evidence that a group meeting setting promotes enthusiam and influences individual judgement, leading to optimism and overconfidence.

A by-product of anonymity is that the experts do not need to meet as a group in a physical location. An important advantage of this is that it increases the
likelihood of gathering experts with diverse skills and expertise from varying locations.
#### Setting the forecasting task in a Delphi
In a Delphi setting, it may be useful to conduct a preliminary round of information gathering from the experts before setting the forecasting tasks.
Alternatively, as experts submite their initial forecasts and justifications, valuable information which is not shared between all experts can be identified
by the facilitator when compiling the feedback.
#### Iteration
The process of the experts submitting forecasts, receiving feedback, and reviewing their forecasts in light of the feedback, is repeated until a satisfactory
level of consensus between the experts is reached. Satisfactory consensus does not mean complete convergence in the forecast value; it simply means that the
variability of the responses has decreases to a satisfactory level. Usually two or three rounds are sufficient. Experts are more likely to drop out as the
number of iterations increases, so too many rounds should be avoided.
#### Limitations and variations
Applying the Delphi method can be time consuming. In a group meeting, final forecasts can possibly be reached in hours or even minutes - something which is almost
impossible to do in a Delphi setting. If it is taking a long time to reach a consensus in a Delphi setting, the panel may lose interest and cohesiveness.
#### The facilitator
The role of the facilitator is of the utmost importance. The facilitator is largely responsible for the design and administration of the Delphi process. The
facilitator is also responsible for providing feedback to the experts and generating the final forecasts. In this role, the facilitator needs to be experienced
enough to recognize areas that may need more attention, and to direct the experts' attention to these. The efficiency and effectiveness of the facilitator can
dramatically increases the probability of a successful Delphi method in a judgmental forecasting setting.

## Forecasting by analogy
A useful judgmental approach which is often implemented in practice is forecasting by analogy. Obviously, forecasting by analogy comes with challenges. We should
aspire to base forecasts on multiple analogies rather than a single analogy, which may create biases. However, these may be challenging to identify.
#### A structured analogy
Alternatively, a structured approach comprising a panel of experts can be implemented. The concept is similar to that of a Delphi; however, the forecasting task
is completed by considering analogies.
1. A panel of experts who are likely to have experience with analogous situations is assembled.
2. Tasks/challenges are set and distributed to the experts.
3. Experts identify and describe as many analogies as they can, and generate forecasts based on each analogy.
4. Experts list similarities and differences of each analogy to the target situation, then rate the similarity of each analogy to the target situation on a scale.
5. Forecasts are derived by the facilitator using a set rule. This can be a weighted average, where the weights can be guided by the ranking scores of each
analogy by the experts.

As with the Delphi approach, anonymity of the experts may be an advantage in not suppressing creativity, but could hinder collaboration. Green and Armstrong found
no gain in collaboration between the experts in their results. A key finding was that experts with multiple analogies and who had direct experience with the
analogies, generated the most accurate forecasts.
#### Scenario forecasting
A fundamentally different approach to judgmental forecasting is scenario-based forecasting. The aim of this approach is to generate forecasts based on plausible
scenarios. In contrast to the two previous approaches (Delphi and forecasting by analogy) where the resulting forecast is intended to be a likely outcome, each
scenario-based forecast may have a low probability of occurence.

With scenario forecasting, decision makers often participate in the generation of scenarios. While this may lead to some biases, it can ease the communication of
the scenario-based forecasts, and lead to a better understanding of the results.
#### New product forecasting
The definition of a new product can vary. It may be an entirely new product which has been launched, a variation of an existing product, new and improved, a
changed in the pricing scheme of an existing product, or even an existing product entering a new market.

Judgmental forecasting is usually the only available method for new product forecasting, as historical data are unavailable. 

Other methods which are more specific to the situation are also available. We briefly describe three such methods which are commonly applied in practice. These
methods are less structured than those already discussed, and are likely to lead to more biased forecasts as a result.
#### Sales force composite
In this approach, forecasts for each outlet/branch/store of a company are generated by salespeople, and are then aggregated. This usually involves sales
managers forecasting the demand for the outlet they manage. Salespeople are usually closest to the interaction between customers and products, and often develop an
intuition about customer purchasing intentions. They bring this valuable experience and expertise to the forecast.

However, having salespeople generate forecasts violates the key principle of segregating forecasters and users, which can create biases in many directions. It is
common for the performance of a salesperson to be evaluated against the sales forecasts or expectations set beforehand.
